# God

That is why, she says, ‘that “God” never responds’; ‘it’s cause they’re in PRISON…and their crime was distracting humans from the one true source that lives within all of us.’ In a distinctly postmodern fashion, gods – and even God himself – become a mutable; the traditional status of God as a creator, for example, becomes just one of many theories, the truth of which becomes relative to the individual.

Indeed, despite the seemingly limitless possibilities for eclecticism and innovation within the universe of digital spirituality, the traditional ‘God’ and organised religion are somewhat of a taboo. This is made quite transparent in the Reddit post about weakening and ‘slaying’ Allah, but it can also be found in a number of WitchTok videos where explicit criticisms of Christianity are rife. For example, one user creates videos where she mocks Christians, in one instance replying to a comment left by a Christian user – reading ‘may God forgive you’ (in response to her beliefs) – with the remark, ‘[forgive me] for what exactly…critical thinking?’

The rejection of organised religion on the basis of its lack of ‘critical thinking’ is particularly telling in terms of where digital spirituality stands in relation to secularity. While on the one hand, these WitchTokkers seek to ‘re–enchant’ their worlds through reviving unseen realms and deities, they appear to remain faithful to the Enlightenment project of modernity. Their rejections of organised religion, for example, are strikingly resonant of the Reformation and Enlightenment climate of opinion. Making a similar observation about the New Age movement, the scholar Wouter Hanegraaff has identified these forms of spirituality as existing ‘in the mirror of secular thought’. Owing to the fact that they adopt ‘the characteristic arguments of the Enlightenment to attack conventional Christianity’, he says, they ‘cannot be characterised as a return to pre–Enlightenment worldviews.’

It would seem, then, that despite its attempts to re–enchant reality, digital spirituality too exists in ‘the mirror of secular thought’. Its desire to ‘slay God’ – both literally and more implicitly within the very act of practicing magic and attaining supernatural powers – is a clear echo of the rejection of religion that has characterised the Western world since the European Enlightenment; the very source, according to Weber, of ‘disenchantment’ itself. Far from representing a post–materialist rewiring of theology or metaphysics, these forms of spirituality appear not to reverse but rather to ramify disenchantment – now with an added a software update.

[[notes]]